# A model of the universe based on a state machine operating on a set of discrete space points and energy points in a conventional Euclidean space.

## Intro
Einstein tells us that E = MC^2, that energy and matter are basically the same (not that you can convert one into the other, but that they are always fundamentally the same). General Relativity tells us that energy/matter alters the structure of the surrounding space, and that the movement of energy/matter is dictated by the surrounding space. The goal of GR has always been to describe all the fields & forces that we witness in the universe as nothing other than features/variances/inhomogeneities in space. However, the mathematics that was developed to describe this concept was unfortunately built on counter-intuitive concepts like a constant speed of light and 4D Minkowski spacetime, which although mathematically fairly successful, makes it impossible for the average human mind to grasp intuitively. Einstein even remarked “since the mathematicians pounced on the relativity theory I no longer understand it myself”,  it’s worth considering that remark deeply because it reveals that Einstein first had an intuitive understanding before any mathematics was developed. It is my standpoint that intuitive understanding is primary, and mathematics is only a tool and is secondary.  Unfortunately, for one reason or another, perhaps because we can’t mark an exam on intuitive understanding but we can on maths, the ability to work the mathematics has become primary and the intuitive understanding has become sidelined, even to the point when many physics teachers will claim that intuitive understanding for the human mind is out of bounds.

## So here’s the idea…
All philosophers through the ages who are worth their salt come to this same conclusion:
The simplest thing conceivable is nothingness, emptiness. However, this emptiness, by definition, has a dimensionality to it, it is an area with no thing in it. There is no thing over on the left, there is no thing over on the right, there is no thing in front of me, there is no thing above me, there was no thing a moment ago, there was no thing before that. But after some time one realises that because of this dimensionality, this area, it is still a something, there is an ‘over here’, an ‘over there’, a ‘moment ago’ and ‘I am conscious of it’. So if we ponder this we can realise (in the truest sense of the term) that there is a more truer emptiness than what we had first conceived, absolute void if you like, that does not even have dimensionality, it is not an expanse, it does not even have time, it is inaccessible to consciousness. Of course language itself breaks down here because even the word ‘void’ conveys an expanse of nothingness. Equally appropriate to the term ‘absolute void’ is ‘the opposite of space’, or ‘everything’. How funny it sounds to equate ‘everything’ to ‘absolute void’. I don’t think this is something our mechanical intellect can grasp, it needs to be intuited from a deeper part of ourselves. So all of a sudden, from thinking about nothing, we have two things: dimensional nothingness and true nothingness. And it is from the interplay, the compound, of these two that all things are made. Michelangelo produces his David from not just marble, but marble and empty space - if it was just marble the universe would only be an infinity of marble. All the wonders of the digital age subsist on an underlying structure of 1s and 0s.

It is said that cultures of the past did not accept zero as a number, and it was only when we did accept zero as a number, as good as any other (but with some interesting characteristics) that mathematics began to flourish. I think physics needs to make a similar revolution. The flourishing of mathematics came about when we treated the non-number zero, as a number; when we gave the non-number its own place on the number line. The flourishing of physics will be due to treating non-dimensionality as dimensionality, giving coordinates to that which does not have coordinates - what do I mean by that? I will explain in due course.

The mathematics of mainstream physics is built upon fixing the speed of light to be constant, however it is clear that this was contrary to Einstein’s intuition (see physicsdetective.com). If one tries to think of the speed of light as fixed, one is forced to vary something else to create the necessary inhomogeneity of space, that thing being time. Therefore in mainstream physics we talk of the topology of spacetime, that it is not ‘flat’ (to use the 2D analogue). Topology is like how a 2D person living on a 2D surface, even though they experience a 2D world, may live on a surface that is rolled up into a cylinder, or a donut, or a sphere, it may have bumps or dips causing straight lines that start parallel to not always stay a fixed distance from each other. For the 2D person the complex topology of the 2D surface is easily imagined by us because we can imagine the 2D surface as a 3D structure in our 3D world. The idea in the case of the 2D person is to employ a higher dimensional (3D) space to describe the topology of the 2D surface. So mathematicians chose to describe the inhomogeneity of space required by General Relativity by adding the dimension of time to our ordinary three dimensions to form a four dimensional spacetime, within this four dimensional spacetime, space is hilly (to use the 2D analogue). If this concept of four dimensional space makes you want to quit with a headache… I don’t blame you, because it’s the wrong idea. It’s an idea that kind of works mathematically (up to a point), but only so much as vintage planetariums were able to describe the motion of the planets in the sky despite thinking of the Earth as the centre of the universe. Apart from being impossible for the average human mind to comprehend, curved 4D spacetime misses the heart of the matter (I mean that in a double sense), and that is energy. The modern understanding of spacetime can’t explain energy (matter). Physics teachers draw lines on a Minkowski diagram representing a photon or an object in spacetime but they haven’t the foggiest idea what it is, there is just no explanation for it in the spacetime model.

To provide a much better description of General Relativity and to simply explain what energy actually is I propose there is no need for exotic higher dimensional spaces above the three dimensional Euclidean space that we know and love. Most physicists would have you believe that the human tendency (or necessity) to think in Euclidean space is a just an unfortunate consequence of our evolution, and that “it’s just a limitation we are stuck with but reality is much more complicated than that, you can’t hope to wrap your mind around it, just munge the equations and make do with these poor 2D analogies”.

Space is inhomogeneous (some areas are different than others, thicker or under more pressure for example) *and* it has a topology (straight lines that start parallel do not necessarily stay a fixed distance apart), *but* rather than pinching time to build a 4D spacetime, space itself exists within a meta-space that is our good old friend, regular Euclidean three dimensional space. We say meta-space because it is in some way transcendent of ordinary space, but it is still just regular 3D Euclidean space. Time is the progression from one state of space to the next, it is a completely different type of thing to spatial dimension. The entirety of the universe is only in one state at one point in time, and moves to the next state by the application of some simple function on the current state. Light most definitely does not move at a constant speed, it only moves at a constant speed relative to the homogeneity of the local space - and the idea that light only travels in straight lines is quite silly. At least I think this is a far better model than our current one.

It is fairly straightforward how to think of the space being inhomogeneous whilst still being situated within Euclidean 3 space, like we know the air pressure in the atmosphere of the Earth varies from place to place, but how are we to think of space as having a topology without requiring an additional dimension to situate it in. The answer is, just as mathematicians eventually realised that it would be more fruitful to treat the non-number zero just the same as any other number, and to give it a place on the number line, so we should treat non-dimensional nothingness in a spatial way. Now, one might object here and point out that what happened with zero was people realised there is another sense of number apart from the counting of things, i.e. it can be well argued that when counting sheep there it is unreasonable to think of zero sheep, however when the temperature on your thermometer drops 1 degree below 1 degree it is very reasonable to consider that a number and call it zero. However, when you think about it, I am suggesting something along the same lines: just as we realised a higher sense of number where zero does make sense to be placed next to one, so I am suggesting a higher sense of three dimensional Euclidean space that includes both physical dimensional space and non-dimensional nothingness where non-dimensional nothingness is treated dimensionally. 

As in mathematics we think of the real number line as the ‘set of all real numbers’, i.e. although in a certain sense it is a continuum it is also a collection of distinct numbers (albeit an infinite one), so we can think of the space in the universe as consisting of a ‘set of three dimensional (x, y, z) points’, although I am suggesting that the actual x, y, z coordinates are coordinates in the meta-space not physical space. For example, to simplify things to one dimension, say your universe only consists of 7 space points in a line, at a particular instant in time they have coordinates in the meta-space of 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 9. In the meta-space there is a gap of 4 between the ‘3’ point and the ‘7’ point, but in physical space 7 is just the next one along from 3, physical space is unaware of the gap of 4. (However this is not exactly measurable physical distance, which depends on the propagation of light). At the next instant those same 7 space points might have the meta-space coordinates of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 (i.e. the gap has disappeared). From the point of view of physical space nothing has changed between the two intants, but from the point of view of meta-space there was a gap in the first instant but there wasn’t a gap in the second instant. Put another way, the points in physical space are only relative to each other (who is next door to me, who is two doors down), but the points in meta-space are given absolute values. You might ask, what is the point of the meta-space if there was no change from the perspective of physical space? The point is that the meta-space gives us the arena in which to describe non-dimensional nothingness in a dimensional way. So just as we described dimensional space in the meta-space by thinking of it as a collection of points with values in the meta-space, so we can describe non-dimensional nothingness in the meta-space by thinking of it as a collection of points with values in the meta-space. In the above example the first instant may have had non-dimensional nothingness points in the meta-space of 5, 6, 11, 12, and in the second instant those points could be 11, 12, 13, 14. In one sense this meta-space idea that includes both physical dimensional space and non-dimensional nothingness but in a dimensionalised way is seems like an difficult to grasp concept, but as we will see, because it is only good old friend E3 it is very easy to get an intuitive feel for it (and visualise it).

This simply means that the meta-space is a regular 3D Euclidean space that contains a set of points representing dimensional physical space, and a set of points representing non-dimensional nothingness. If your rational mind is still crying that you just can’t give non-dimensional nothingness dimensional values, may I gently remind you of the people who complained about the number zero, and point out that the dimensionality of non-dimensionality only exists in the meta-space, just a zero rightly doesn’t sit on the number line of counting numbers, but does very sit on the real number line (which is a higher sense of number).

At this point I can’t help but be drawn to Georg Cantor’s revelation that even though there exists an infinity of rational numbers (ratios of two integers), there still exists countless many real numbers (numbers like Pi and root-2) between any two rational numbers.

##What’s the point?
